hello maths fans i am dr tom crawford
from the university of oxford
and i'm here with a special video for
maths week london
a celebration of all things maths
happening across the uk's capital city
today we're looking at perimeter and
area
but not just for any usual shape what
we're going to do is to calculate the
perimeter and the
area of what we call a fractal fractals
are objects that have a repeating
pattern
which means they look the same no matter
how closely you zoom into them the
mandelbrot set is one of the most famous
and most beautiful fractals
but we're going to start with something
much simpler that you create yourself at
home
and it's called the cox snowflake we
start with an equilateral triangle
that's a triangle where all of the sides
and
all of the angles are the same
so if we call the side length here is
going to be 1
and then all of our three angles must be
60 degrees
because the total angle of course must
be 180
inside a triangle now the perimeter is
quite straightforward for this shape
so p is just equal to the distance
around the edge
which is one plus one plus one so we can
say that the
perimeter p is just equal to
3. the area is a little bit trickier
we have a formula for the area of any
triangle
which is a half times the base
which we'll call b and times the height
h and the issue is here we don't
actually know
the height because when we say height we
mean the perpendicular distance
to the top of our triangle where this is
a right
angle at the base so we know the base is
one
so we can substitute that one in we know
of course the number one half so the
only thing we're missing is this height
h but fortunately we have quite a lot of
information
in our diagram to allow us to calculate
h
so the first method you might think to
use would be to use pythagoras theorem
so pythagoras's theorem a squared plus b
squared equals c squared
tells us that the length of this side
squared plus the length of h
squared must equal this diagonal length
the hypotenuse
squared which of course is just one so
we have
a half along the bottom so a half
squared plus h squared
must equal one squared which of course
is just one
so now we can rearrange and solve this
to find h
so h squared will be one minus one
quarter
so h squared is three quarters
just rearranging and then we square root
and h must be equal to root 3
divided by 2. so now we know the value
of h
we substitute this into our formula up
here
and we know that the area of our
equilateral triangle
is equal to a half times 1 times root 3
over 2
which is the square root of 3 divided by
4.
so in summary for our basic equilateral
triangle of side length
1 the perimeter is equal to 3
and the area is equal to the square root
of 3 divided by
4. now this is where things get really
interesting
because now we're going to take our
equilateral triangle
and we're going to repeat a series of
steps
over and over again to generate our
fractal called the snowflake we
begin by dividing up
all of the edges in our diagram in its
current
state into three equal
parts the next step is to remove the
central piece along each of these
edges so we take away the middle one
third
along the left hand edge the middle one
along the right hand edge and the middle
one third
along the bottom the third and final
step
is to now add two new edges in place of
the one that's been removed
each of these also being of length one
third
on each of the gaps so we fill
each gap that was in the center that's
been removed has been replaced
by one of these wedge shapes and it's
very important
that the length of each edge in this
picture
of which there are now 12 in total each
of them
has length one third so after one
iteration of these three steps
divide your line into three remove the
middle segment
and replace it by a wedge after one
iteration
we end up with this beautiful star shape
to get the next iteration of our fractal
we just have to repeat the same three
steps
so remember the first step was to divide
up each line into three
equal pieces our second step was to then
remove the central piece from each
segment
and then our third step was to draw a
wedge or draw two
other lines in a pointed shape in each
of these gaps
so there we have the second iteration in
our
infinite process to generate the
snowflake so remember to get the final
shape you have to repeat this same
procedure
these same three steps again and again
forever and ever
so each of these lines would have to be
divided up into three segments
you remove the middle one you add your
wedge you do this again and again and
again
on all of these lines and this will
become increasingly complex
at each stage and eventually lead to
your
infinitely complex fractal the cox
snowflake is undoubtedly an incredibly
beautiful pattern
which in itself is pretty amazing seeing
as it came from such a simple set of
rules
but we want to go further we want to
know what happens to the perimeter
and the area we have the values here for
our original equilateral triangle
but of course at each step we are adding
these
extra lines to the perimeter and this
increases the area of the shape so what
we're going to do next is to try and
calculate the final value
of the perimeter and the area of the
full
snowflake as we repeat these steps
forever so let's start with the
perimeter the original equilateral
triangle
remember had perimeter equal to three
and
each of its sides had length one and the
trick to understanding the perimeter
is to think about what we are doing at
each step
because the steps themselves do not
change we just repeat them forever and
ever
but if we can understand what happens at
each individual step
at each iteration in the fractal
generating process
then we can try and work out what would
happen if we did that
forever so our starting point is going
to be to consider
the original straight line of length
one because our first step in this
process was to divide that line
into three equal pieces the second step
was then to remove the central piece so
we remove this
leaving our line to now have a total
length
with a gap of two thirds and then we
added in
two other lines each of length one-third
because we added in two lines to replace
the one
that we removed and those two lines were
each of the same length
as the one that was removed so at the
beginning
this had length one and then after that
very first
application of our set of rules
it now has length four lots of one-third
four-thirds and the reason we only need
to think about
one particular edge is we do the same
process
to every edge of our equilateral
triangle
so originally we had three edges of
length one
each edge has undergone this process
from steps one to three so each edge has
increased from a perimeter of one
to be four thirds and we still have
three of them
so the new perimeter is just three lots
of four thirds which is equal to four
so the perimeter at step two is going to
be equal to
four now for the second iteration we
again
follow the same three steps where we
take each line in our diagram
divide it up into three pieces remove
the middle piece
and add the wedge and again we have this
shape
repeated three times around
the original triangle we have the star
shape if you remember
so like before instead of considering
the whole shape
we can just look at what happens to this
one edge
and then multiply by 3 to get the total
new perimeter so we divide each one up
into three pieces remove the middle and
add
our little wedge so these are no longer
going to be a third
but it is important to remember that
they started at one third
so they started at one third we divide
it up into three pieces so each one is
now one-ninth
and there are four of them so this one
has four-ninths in total
because we have each little line is
one-ninth and we've got four
with that bump shape same here so that's
four nines same up here this one's four
ninths
and this one's four ninths so in the
grand total here is four lots of four
ninths
which is 16 over nine after step two
so we have 16 over nine on one edge
after the second iteration of the
process and again
there are three sides to our shape so
the new
total perimeter is three lots of 16 over
which turns into 16 over 3.
so now we know the value of the
perimeter for the first two
iterations of our fractal generating
process
it begins at 3 then it goes to 4
then it goes to 16 divided by 3.
but of course we want to know what
happens if we were to repeat this
process forever
so what we really need to know is what
is happening
between each step how does the perimeter
change
from one iteration to the next one along
in this sequence so remember our
starting length was
one it then went to a length of four
thirds and then this jagged thing had
the length equal to 16 over nine
and what's happened to each stage is
we've multiplied
by four thirds one times four thirds
gives you
four divided by three and if you
multiply again by four thirds
you get 16 divided by nine so what's
actually happening
through our three steps of dividing into
three pieces
removing the middle piece adding in two
more
we're taking the original line which had
three
equally length pieces and replacing it
by four equally length pieces
so that's where we're going from one
three out of three
is going to four out of three and then
all we do in the next step
is take each of these individual
segments
and repeat the same process so because
we're doing the same
thing the fact that we know what happens
in the very first instance
one goes to four thirds in fact means
the same thing will happen at every step
beyond that so what this means overall
for our total perimeter
is that at each step we take our old
value and multiply
by four thirds so at step
n equals one when we had the star shape
we would have total perimeter equal to
three the old value for the equilateral
triangle
multiplied by four thirds
and then at step two which is the one
drawn here on the board
we multiply again by four thirds
so that would be four thirds squared if
i went
forwards and did the iteration three
then i would get a more complicated
shape
we multiply the old perimeter by four
thirds
and we'd get four thirds to the power
three
after three iterations
so hopefully you can now see that if i
were to do this
n times the total perimeter will be
equal to
three times four thirds to the power of
n where n is the total number of
iterations of our three rules
if we now plot the graph of this
function
with perimeter p on the y-axis
and number of iterations of our fractal
generating process
n on the x-axis we've got three
so it'll start at three when n is zero
and then as n increases we get a larger
and larger
power of four thirds and that will
actually increase
very quickly so our perimeter
will look something like this
and of course to get our fractal we have
to do this
an infinite number of times that's what
it means to say repeat the process
forever and ever and ever
and this is why fractals look the same
as we continue to zoom in
towards them closer and closer forever
and ever
so the final value of the perimeter in
this case
the perimeter of the snowflake is
actually
going to go to infinity now let's think
about the
area so the original value for our
equilateral triangle which was our
starting point
was the square root of three divided by
four
and at each step you can hopefully see
from my picture
we continue to add little pieces so
these are being added forever but they
get
small very quickly so the question is
will our area also go to infinity like
the perimeter
or will something else happen that is
what we're going to try
and figure out the calculation for the
area is a little bit more involved than
the one for the perimeter
and to begin with we actually have to
think about
how many triangles how many wedges or
new
pieces are we adding at each step
in our fractal generating process
so if we think back to our original
triangle we just have
three straight lines and then for each
of these straight lines
they then in the first iteration
are replaced by
a wedge something
like this so for each edge
what we are doing is adding one new
triangle and this is going to be key in
our calculation for the area
so for each edge so one edge
gives one new
triangle and this is going to be the
same if i were to repeat this to get our
second
iteration i would take one of these
edges
and add in a little wedge so again in
the next
step each edge or each line
gives rise to one new triangle
so we now know that at each new step
say step n we add the number of
triangles
equal to the number of edges in the
previous
step step n minus 1.
so let's put some numbers in this let's
look at the first few
examples so at step
n equals one we have
originally three edges in our
equilateral triangle
so the number of edges
is three and for each of those edges we
replace them
with the spike so we add three new
triangles
then on our next step n equals two
the number of edges of our shape is
equal to one two three
four eight twelve
and what we do is add 12 new triangles
and we can continue to fill in this
table working out
what happens at n equals 3 how many new
triangles do we add
and the fact that it's equal to the
number of edges
at the previous step but what we want to
do
is come up with a general formula that
describes
this pattern now after a little bit of
thought
perhaps trying out some more values
perhaps drawing more pictures and
counting the new triangles and the
number of edges
you will in fact find that at step n
what we do is we add the number of new
triangles
equal to the number of edges and that
is given by 3 times
4 to the power n
minus 1. so this is the number of
new triangles added
at step n
now whenever you have a formula you
should always check that these values
work for some of our
earlier easier cases so when n is equal
to one for example
we add three new triangles and three
times
four to the power zero is just three so
that works
then when n equals two we have three
times four
to the two minus one that's just four
three times four is twelve
we add twelve new triangles and you can
check this and this will in fact work
for any particular step so at the nth
step
in our fractal generating process we add
3 times 4 to the n minus 1 new
triangles now you might be thinking what
does the number of triangles have to do
with the
area and the trick here is to work out
what the
area of these new triangles we're adding
is equal to because in each step we're
actually
adding on area so the area never gets
smaller it's the original triangle
and then we make it bigger and then
bigger again and bigger again
so the area is always being added to and
the amount of
area we add at each step
is given by the area of the new
triangles
that we add so the next step is to work
out
what is the relationship between the
area of the new triangles added
to those that are already part of our
shape so again we want to think back to
our very first iteration and the simple
case of the equilateral triangle
so we started with our equilateral
triangle
of side length one and then
each of our edges gave rise to a new
triangle
as we've just figured out and these
new triangles have side length
equal to one third of the original
side length so each of these are
one-third
if these are one so one-third
one-third one-third third
etc so all of these are one-third so now
the triangle itself
the ones that have been added these ones
they have length one-third one-third
one-third so if you reduce each length
by one-third then your area
is equal to a length times a length
so your area is reduced by a factor of a
third
times a third so again
the length has been reduced to be
one-third of the original shape
so your area reduces by one-third
squared because all of the lengths are
reduced by this scaling factor
so the area here is one-ninth
of the area of the triangle at the
previous step
and in fact this will be true for all of
these new triangles that we add
at each step they have exactly 1 9
of the area of the triangles from the
step
before if we call the area of the
triangles added at step
n let's call that a n then the area of
those triangles
is just equal to 1 9 of the area of the
triangles added
at the step before which is then equal
to
1 9 so 1 over 9 squared
times the area at the step before
and this will carry on forever and get
us all the way back
to our starting area a0
divided by 9 to the power
n so the area of the triangle added at
step
n which is what we're interested in down
here
is exactly equal to the original area
which of course we know over here so i
can label this now as a naught
divided by 9 to the power n
so now we know the total number of
triangles added
at step n and the area of each of those
triangles
so the total amount of area added at
step
n is just equal to
the two numbers multiplied together
so the total area added must be equal to
three times four to the n minus one
so i'm going to write that as three
quarters times four to the n
multiplied by the original area a0
multiplied by 9 to the power n
so i can write that all together and get
four nights
to the power end and this formula down
the bottom
is equal to the amount of area added
at step n in our fractal generating
process
so to get the value added at a
particular step you just substitute in
that value of
n and that tells you how much area
you're adding
to what was already there so now that we
know the amount of new
area added at each step we just add
all of these together for different
powers
of this four ninths fraction and that
will in fact give us the total
area so at step n our
area a n is equal to
the starting value a zero
plus the first term at step one
is three quarters times four ninths
times a zero
then at step two we add in another
three quarters times four ninths squared
times a zero then at step three this is
replaced by a cubed
and we carry on like this until we get
to the amount added at step
n which has the power n and we can write
this as a formula
this is just mathematical notation it
means the same thing
add all of these together when this
number starts at one and goes up to n
but we write it as the sum
from k equals one the starting value
up to n the end value of the formula
so three quarters times 4 9
to the power k times
a0 so this formula here
gives you the area of your
snowflake
at step m in the fractal generating
process we can in fact simplify this
formula a little bit
because we have a common factor of a
zero
so we can take that out to the front
then we've got one plus the three
quarters
isn't involved in the sum over k so we
take that
outside and then we've got the sum
from k equals one to n
of 4 9 to the power k
so it's the same formula just written a
little neater
now if you've studied a levels or if
you're going to go on and study a levels
you will come across
this but this is in fact a geometric
sum it's something that we know how to
calculate
the answer to there's a formula that
tells you what the total of this
is equal to so if we use that formula
this will in fact be simplified even
further
and it becomes a naught times
one plus three quarters
now for our geometric sum the total of
this is equal to the first
term so when k is one so that's going to
be
four ninths multiplied by
one minus the common ratio which here is
4 9
to the power n the last term all divided
by
1 minus 4 9. and simplifying the
fractions
gives us our final formula of a naught
divided by five times eight minus
three four ninths to the power
n substituting in the value for a zero
our initial area for the equilateral
triangle
we get the final formula for the area of
our cox snowflake
at step n in the fractal generation
process exactly as we did with the
perimeter
to investigate this formula further we
want to consider the graph
of the function so again we plot the
area on our y-axis
and the number of iterations n
on our x-axis so we know the starting
value
is equal to a0 which is root 3 divided
by
4. now
as n goes to infinity we want to look at
what happens
to our formula up here so the first term
is just a constant multiplied by eight
so that will not change with the value
of n
but the second term will and importantly
what we're doing here is taking the
number 4 9
which is less than 1 we're taking this
number to a larger and larger
power and if we take this in fact to an
infinite power
or a very very large number this will go
to zero
so our function will begin
to increase as we move
through these first few steps but then
it goes flat and as n tends to infinity
it will tend towards a constant value
and that value will be given by this
first
coefficient here so the final answer in
fact
will be the square root of three
times two-fifths will be our final
area as n tends to infinity
so in summary the snowflake is not
only incredibly beautiful
but it exhibits this really amazing
mathematical behavior
it has an infinite perimeter the
distance around the edge
goes on forever and ever but the amount
of
area inside the shape is given
by this constant and finite value
thank you everyone for watching if
you've enjoyed this video please do
remember to subscribe
and i'll be back soon with some more
maths fun take care